Improvements to CoreCLR Building, Debugging, and Testing Documentation (#75569)
dotnet/runtime: docs/workflow/debugging/coreclr/debugging-runtime.md

        // remember to use double backslashes (\\)
        "HelloWorld.dll"
      ]
    }
```

**NOTE**: For Visual Studio 17.3, changing the location of launched executable doesn't work, so the `CORE_ROOT` is necessary.

5. Right click the CoreCLR project or `coreclr\CMakeLists.txt` in the folder view, and then invoke the _Install_ command.
6. Press F10 or F11 to start debugging at main, or set a breakpoint and press F5.

Whenever you make changes to the CoreCLR source code, don't forget to invoke the _Install_ command again to have them set in place.

### Using Visual Studio Code

It will be very nice to be able to achieve all this using Visual Studio Code as well, since it's the editor of choice for lots of developers.

Visual Studio Code instructions coming soon!

### Using SOS with Windbg or Cdb on Windows

Under normal circumstances, SOS usually comes shipped with Windbg, so no additional installation is required. However, if this is not the case for you, you want to use another version, or any other circumstance that requires you to install it separately/additionally, here are two links with useful information on how to get it set up:

> * The official [Microsoft docs on SOS](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/diagnostics/dotnet-sos).

Reviewer: Please remove `en-us` from all URLs. This forces localization instead of letting the users browser provide the settings.

* The instructions at the [diagnostics repo](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/installing-sos-windows-instructions.md).

For more information on SOS commands click [here](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/sos-debugging-extension-windows.md).

## Debugging CoreCLR on Linux and MacOS

Very similarly to Windows, Linux and MacOS also require to have at least the _clr_ subset built prior to attempting to debug, most preferably under the _Debug_ configuration:

```bash
./build.sh -s clr -c Debug
```

Note that you can omit the `-c Debug` flag, since it's the default one when none other is specified. We are leaving it here in this doc for the sake of clarity.

If for some reason `System.Private.CoreLib.dll` is missing, you can rebuild it with the following command, instead of having to go through the whole build again:

```bash
./build.sh -s clr.corelib+clr.corelibnative -c Debug
```

> **NOTE**: When debugging with _CORE\_LIBRARIES_, the `libs` subset must also be built prior to attempting any debugging.

Reviewer: This is an environment variable that `corerun` respects to indicate where to look for the BCL. In practice though it simply prepends values to the TPA.

https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/6c2cfa4ae26ab71ea42a2cf12b3ae37bb6d134c5/src/coreclr/hosts/corerun/corerun.cpp#L230-L236

2. Start lldb passing `corerun`, the app to run (e.g. `HelloWorld.dll`), and any arguments this app might need: `lldb /path/to/corerun /path/to/app.dll <app args go here>`
3. If you're using the installed version of SOS, you can skip this step. If you built SOS manually, you have to load it before starting the debugging session: `plugin load /path/to/built/sos/libsosplugin.so`. Note that `.so` is for Linux, and `.dylib` is for MacOS. You can find more information in the diagnostics repo [private sos build doc](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/main/documentation/using-sos-private-build.md).
4. Launch program: `process launch -s`
5. To stop breaks on _SIGUSR1/SIGUSR2_ signals used by the runtime run the following command: `process handle -s false SIGUSR1 SIGUSR2`
6. Set a breakpoint where CoreCLR is initialized, as it's the most stable point to begin debugging: `breakpoint set -n LoadLibraryExW`.
7. Get to that point by issuing `process continue` after setting the breakpoint.
8. Now, you're ready to begin your debugging session. You can set breakpoints or run SOS commands like `clrstack` or `sos VerifyHeap`.  Note that SOS command names are case sensitive.

> **NOTE:** _Corerun_ is a simple host that does not support resolving NuGet dependencies. It relies on libraries being locatable via the `CORE_LIBRARIES` environment variable, or present in the same directory as the _corerun_ executable. The instructions above are equally applicable to the _dotnet_ host.

Reviewer: I would remove most references to `CORE_LIBRARIES`. That is a very uncommon scenario for people. The `corerun` application also has a more discoverable command flag that I would recommend in practice. Either way, neither really need to be mentioned outside of the doc for using `corerun` - see https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/workflow/testing/using-corerun.md.

#### Disabling Managed Attach/Debugging

> The `COMPlus_EnableDiagnostics` _environment variable_ can be used to disable managed debugging. This prevents the various OS artifacts used for debugging, such as named pipes and semaphores on Linux and MacOS, from being created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DOTNET_EnableDiagnostics` _environment variable_ can be used to disable managed debugging. This prevents the various OS artifacts used for debugging, such as named pipes and semaphores on Linux and MacOS, from being created.
```

All references to `COMPlus_` should be replaced with `DOTNET_`.

      "console": "internalConsole", // Use VSCode's internal console instead of launching more terminals.
      "justMyCode": false, // Be able to debug into native assemblies.
      "enableStepFiltering": false, // Be able to debug into class initializations, field accessors, etc.
    }
  ]
}
```

* Set a breakpoint and launch the debugger, inspecting variables and call stacks will now work

### Using Visual Studio for Managed Code

* Use _File -> Open Project_ (not open file) and select the binary you want to use as your host (typically _dotnet.exe_ or _corerun.exe_).
* Open the project properties for the new project that was just created and set the following:
  * _Arguments_: Make this match whatever arguments you would have used at the command-line. For example if you would have run `dotnet.exe exec Foo.dll`, then set `arguments = "exec Foo.dll"` (**NOTE**: Make sure you use `dotnet exec` instead of `dotnet run` because the run verb command is implemented to launch the app in a child process, and the debugger won't be attached to that child process).
  * _Working Directory_: Make this match whatever you would have used on the command-line.

>   * _Debugger Type_: Set this to `Managed (CoreCLR)`. If you're going to debug the native C++ code, then you would select `Native Only` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * _Debugger Type_: Set this to `Managed (.NET Core, .NET 5+)`. If you're going to debug the native C++ code, then you would select `Native Only` instead.
```
